Introduction. 

Ramula et al. 2009, Salguero-Gomez and Plotkin, Picard and Liang, do not just state criticisms of MPMs; 
they are computational studies providing evidence for what they assert. Ramula et al 2009 really
do find that IPMs work better than small matrix models when sample sizes are small, and nothing in Doak et al. 
contradicts that finding. Ozgul et al. (2012) fitted an MPM and an IPM to the same data set, and
found that only the IPM correctly predicted the effect of experimental perturbations to their laboratory
soil mite system. These papers are not merely stating opinions, as one would infer from how they are presented
in Doak et al.; they are providing evidence to support them. 

Also, can Doak et al. identify the specific sentence in Rees et al. (2014) which asserts the general superiority of
IPMs? The Introduction contains a paragraph arguing that MPMs are preferable in some circumstances, while
IPMs are preferable in others. In what way does this differ from the conclusions of Doak et al? 

The sentence about "actual implementation" amounts to the assertion that if an integral is evaluated by 
numerical quadrature with equally spaced nodes, it is no longer an integral. The underlying models are  
continuous as claimed; numerical quadrature is often the most efficient way to calculate its properties. 
Exactly the same numbers would be gotten through Monte Carlo integration where matrix approximations 
are not used; it would just take a lot more effort to get the same accuracy. Moreover, the
fact that we use a discrete set of nodes is front-and-center in every paper about methods starting 
with Easterling et al. (2000). Claiming that we "ignore" this fact is ludicrous. 

The fact that vital rate functions have to be modeled as "fairly simple continuous functions of the state
variable" is not "rarely discussed". Rees et al. (2014) talk at length about the importance of doing 
diagnostic tests to validate the fitted model, and we do the same (partially by cut-and-paste) in 
Ellner et al. (2016). 

Overall, the Introduction is full of very inaccurate statements. This should not be acceptable behavior. 

p. 7 In MPMs "multiple iterations are needed to find a model structure that balances sampling and estimation error".
How do you know when this has been achieved? We know how to do this for regression models (e.g., data-based
choice of smoothing parameter in splines; comparison of simple vs. complex parametric models via AIC). 
What comparable methodology has been developed for matrix models? Is there one, or is it just making a choice
that feels like it's right? To balance this they say later (Fig 1) that multiple iterations are needed to
choose the right number of bins in an IPM -- but that's easy, keep increasing until the answers asymptote. 

p. 9 "Next, the squared residuals from this relationship" -- this approach has not been recommended, 
or widely used, for the last 15 years. 

p. 9 "Most commonly, the vital rate estimate corresponding to the midpoint size in the class is used". In other words, 
the MPM method of choice with continuous vital rate functions is exactly the same as an IPM using midpoint rule, 
with a small number of bins. If you are doing things this way, what is gained by using 10 bins instead of 50? The
increase in numerical accuracy with 50 bins may be small, but it's gain without pain. 

p. 12 "in the few studies of which we are aware that test for class number effects in IPMs, 
increasing classes beyond 10 to 20 has little effect on model results". Evidently Doak et al. 
read Chapter 6 of "Data-driven modeling..." without noticing Figures 6.6 or 6.7, which 
show results for empirically parameterized tree IPMs (from Zuidema et al. 2010) where 20 bins would
be woefully inadequate, even with the most accurate numerical quadrature method. The only way to know
if 20 is adquate is to try 20, 50, 100, etc. -- and stop as soon as you can. 

p. 13 "Not featured in most descriptions of IPMs or in the software to run these models..". 
It would be hard for anything else to be true, since its first appearance in print was
in 2016 in DDM. It would take a time machine to put it into a 2013 paper or into IPMpack. 
The presentation in DDM includes general-purpose code to build the kernel this way. 

p. 14  Vital rate estimation. This section takes something perfectly clear and portrays it as ambiguous. 
It is written as if the last 50 years of statistical theory did not exist, and we were
in the early 1970s speculating about the future. I am not aware of any statistical papers or 
books that advocate fitting a smooth function of a continuous variable using step functions. 
When the response function is smooth, we know how to do better. Can Doak et al. find anything 
in the statistical literature to suggest that fitting a smooth response with a step function 
is ever superior to smooth alternatives such as local polynomial regression or splines? When 
there is a jump or a kink we can use piecewise continuous, and there are well 
developed methods to find the change points. 
 
p. 15 Normal growth distributions are not an assumption of IPMs. The range of easy alternatives
is discussed in Rees et al. (2014) and in DDM. I've used t-distributions, Petersen et al. use a 
skewed-normal distribution. This paragraph is comparing MPMs to a straw man. 


 