To the editorial board:

We are pleased to submit our manuscript for your consideration. In it we provide a practical guide to modeling size transitions for Integral Projection Model (IPM) applications, with the goal of advancing the field beyond out-dated standards of analysis. 

IPMs are widely used in ecology, evolution, and conservation biology to study the dynamics of populations structured by continuous state variables, most commonly size. The size transition sub-model of IPMs is typically assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution of future size conditional on current size. However, real size transition data is commonly skewed and/or leptokurtic -- properties that violate Gaussian assumptions. The question we address here is: how can ecologists escape the apparent trade-off between realistically capturing the variance, skew, and kurtosis of size transition data on the one hand, and flexibly including the multiple covariates and random effects that often have substantial impacts on demographic rates?  In this article, we offer an answer. 

We describe a pratical and general workflow of growth modeling based on visually intuitive diagnostics. From a pilot Gaussian model, this approach provides criteria to evaluate whether the pilot model is adequate and to select a more appropriate alternative, if needed. We illustrate our approach with worked examples that revisit published IPM studies, including our own, where Gaussian assumptions do not stand up to scrutiny. None of the tools we use here are new, but they have been slow to trickle into demography and population biology. We hope that this paper will encourage IPM analysts to abandon default (and usually bad) assumptions of growth modeling so that a more inquisitive process can take its place, resulting in a model that is truer to the population for which it is intended. 

Our manuscript is 38 pages from the title page to the last reference, which, we realize, exceeds the journal's recommendations. We hope to be considered for publication nonetheless. Our paper develops a theoretical basis for new statistical approaches, then illustrates our methods with several case studies intentionally selected to represent the types of data sets and analyses that readers of this paper would likely be dealing with. We could alternatively split this into two papers, one for theory development and one for case study implementation, but they would have effectively the same Introduction and Discussion, and would collectively take up more page space than necessary. 

We have prepared our manuscript in Latex and consulted ESA guidelines for Latex authors. We were unable to left-justify the text without creating erroneous line breaks that inflated manuscript length, so this submission is justified to the left and right margins. We took the liberty of placing figures and legends at appropriate locations in the text, rather than following references, to make reviewers' jobs a little easier.

All of our data and code are publicly available on Github and in published data packages, as described in our Data Accessibility Statement. We opt out of double-blind review. 

Sincerely,
Tom Miller
Steve Ellner